
# Random Maze Generator

## Overview

This project is a **Random Maze Generator / Path Finder** which finds a path from the starting point to the end point.

## Why?

The purpose of this project was to gain some hands on experience with [**NumPy**](https://numpy.org/) as I plan to use it in further programming projects, as well as to experiment with GUI modules (such as [**Panel**](https://panel.holoviz.org/) and [**Matplotlib**](https://matplotlib.org/)) that will also be used in further projects.

## How it works

- The program first starts off by running a web interface which is created using the **Panel** module where the user can choose what they want the dimensions of the maze to be.
- The outer maze is generated using the desired dimensions and it's filled with "walls" since the maze hasn't been generated yet.

  - The mazes throughout this program are all made using **NumPy** arrays which are 2d so we can store multiple rows and columns.

- An **inner** maze is generated where the dimensions are smaller by 2 and all the maze generation is applied onto this **inner** maze.

  - The **inner** maze has its dimensions decreased by 2 because I wanted to be able to ensure that the path generated by the algorithm doesn't take up any space on the outer walls which would make it invalid.

- The maze is then generated and here are the steps taken in the generation algorithm.
    1. Within this **inner** maze we have to initialise the starting point and the point in the matrix to ensure that the maze generation will end.
    2. At each point in the generation we have to work out the **neighbours** of the current position in the matrix, and the next node is then chosen from one of these neighbours.
    3. This process is completed until the current node is equal to the target node.

### Working out neighbours

- At each new current node in the program we need to work out the neighbours of the current node and ensure that the program can only select the next node which is valid.
- Each node in the maze can only have 4 possible neighbours: up, down, left and right.
- To work out each of we'd have to adjust the position of the current node and each of these positions and ensure that they are valid and fall within the boundaries.

``` Python
    max_column_row = int(math.sqrt(numberSquares)-3)
    min_column_row = 0
```

This is the code I used to work out the boundaries of the **inner** maze. The variable ```numberSquares``` is used to store the total number of **squares** or **blocks** in the maze.

The reason for this is because the calculation of the boundaries has to be applicable to all of the specified dimensions requested by the user.

```Python
    neighbours_changes = [(-1,0),(1,0),(0,1),(0,-1)]
    valid_neighbours = []
```

This array is used to work out the positions of the neighbours relative to the current position.

The change ```(-1,0)``` is used to work out the up neighbour by decreasing the index of the **outer** array by 1 and keeping the index of the **inner** array constant. The same logic is also applicable to ```(1,0)``` but insteads checks the down neighbour.

The change ```(0,1)``` is used to work out the right neighbour by keeping the index of the **outer** array constant and increasing the index of the **inner** array by 1. The same logic is also applicable to ```(-1,0)``` but instead checks the left neighbour.

```Python
    for i,j in neighbours_changes:
            new_row = row + i
            new_col = col + j
            if (new_row <= max_column_row and new_row >= min_column_row) and (new_col <= max_column_row and new_col >= min_column_row):
                new_pos = (new_row,new_col)
                if new_pos not in visited:
                    valid_neighbours.append(new_pos)
```

This piece of code in the maze generation algorithm is used to work out which of the possible neighbours of the current position in the **inner** maze is valid. These valid neighbours are then appended to an array where a random selection can take place so the next node can be chosen.

```Python
    next_position = random.choice(valid_neighbours)
```

This only runs when the list of valid neighbours of the current node is 0, to ensure that we don't have any loops within the path.

### Tracking Visited Nodes

To keep track of the nodes that have already been visited previously all we have to do is add the current node to the set where the previous nodes have been added to. I chose a set for this because a set ensures there are no repeating values which further prevents any loops within the path. After this we just need to adjust the pointers of the current node to change it to the next node to be visited. After this we just need to change the value stored in that index in the array to 1 to show visually that it's part of the path chosen.

```Python
    #adds the current pos to the visited set
    visited.add(current_pos)
            stack.append(current_pos)
            #changes the position of the current pos to the next pos
            current_pos = next_position
            row,col = current_pos
            valid_maze[row,col] = 1
```

All of these sections mentioned take place in an outer while loop which runs until the pointer of the current node is equal to the pointer of the target node at which point the loop ends as well as the path generation.

### Outputting the Final Maze (Matrix)

The function used to generate the maze for the **inner** maze returns the **maze** generated to the main function where it's initially called so the **inner** maze can be added to the **outer** maze, and to achieve this I implemented matrix splicing using **NumPy**.

```Python
    inner_maze = generate_inner_maze(numberSquares)
    maze[1:int(math.sqrt(numberSquares)) - 1,1:int(math.sqrt(numberSquares)) - 1] = inner_maze
```

This piece of code attaches the **inner** maze to the **outer** maze to the corners which are dependent on the dimensions of the maze. Once this was done I was then able to output the final maze graphically using **Matplotlib**.

```Python
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(5, 5))
    cmap = mcolors.ListedColormap(["black", "white"])
    ax.imshow(maze, cmap=cmap, vmin=0, vmax=1)
    ax.axis("off")
    plt.tight_layout()
```

This is the code which implements **Matplotlib** which is used to output the maze.

- The first line is used for initialisation.

  - ```fig``` is the entire figure
  - ```ax``` is the axes inside of the figure
  - ```figsize = (5,5)``` sets the canvas size in inches

- The second line is used to create a custom colourmap with exactly 2 colours.

  - ```0``` maps to ```"black"```
  - ```1``` maps to ```"white"```

  - ```ListedColormap``` takes a list of colours in order, so the first colour always maps to the lowest value and the last to the highest.

- The third line is used to render the numpy array as an image on the axes.

  - ```cmap=cmap``` is used to ensure it uses the colourmap
  - ```vmin=0, vmax=1``` tells it the value range

- The fourth line just hides the axis lines and labels around the image.
- The last line automatically removes the whitespace around the image, so the maze fills the canvas cleanly.

## Execution

There is no specific requirement to run it, this is because it can be ran by simply running **maze_ui.py**, where there will be a web application to allow the user to select the dimensions of the maze.

## Further development 

